In this video you'll learn how the class member access modifiers work with inheritance We'll also learn
about the protected class member access modifier.
We've already seen the public and private class member access modifiers and we know how they work.
Well C++ provides a third access modifier name protected we define protected data members and methods
exactly as we do public and private.
We provide the protected keyword followed by a colon within the class declaration.
All data and method declarations that follow the protected block will have protected access so protected
class members are accessible to all methods of the class itself protected class members are also accessible
by any derived classes that have been derived from the base class.
However protected class members act like private members so they're not accessible directly from objects
of either the base class or of the derived class.
So you can see the protected class members act very much like private class members unless there's inheritance
involved.
Let's see the syntax once more so we can discuss exactly what's available to the derived class.
You can see that we have a base class and that base class has public protected and private class members
will use three integers a b and c each within a different access modifier to understand how inheritance
works with access modifiers in the next few slides since C++ provides three types of inheritance.
We have to look at each type individually since the access depends on the type of inheritance involved
in the case of public inheritance public class members are inherited and they're also public and the
derived class protected class members are inherited and they're also protected in the derived class.
Finally private class members are also inherited However the derived class does not have access to them.
Any attempt to access base class private class members from the derived class will result in a compiler
error.
This is the most common form of inheritance used in C++.
You can see that the rules make sense.
Public is public protected is protected which means that no matter how deep the class hierarchy goes
the protected class members will be accessible by all derived classes.
Finally something marked as private in the base class implies that the developer of the base class doesn't
want to grant access to those class members.
Now let's look at protected inheritance.
Remember this is not is a inheritance.
The public base class members are protected in the derived class protected base class members are protected
in the derived class and private base class members are not accessible from the derived class.
Finally let's look at private inheritance again private inheritance is not is a inheritance.
So in the case of private inheritance the base class public and protected class members are private
in the derived class and the private class members are not accessible from the derived class.
This may seem confusing and a lot to remember but it's really a very logical approach to inheriting
class members.
As mentioned previously inheritance in C++ is a very complex topic will concentrate on single public
inheritance in this course.
Now let's head over to the IEEE and walk through an example using access modifiers and public inheritance
and life code.
Ok so I'm in the ID.
I'm in the section 15 workspace in the protected members class Access project and what I've got here
is a real simple class similar to the one that we created on the slides where I've got a base class
that I'm declaring right here and it's got a public integer A which I'm initialized to zero and a method
called display.
I've also got a protected integer B and A private integer C both of them initialized to 0.
Now the first thing we'll look at is this line right here.
Line 11.
Obviously member methods have access to everything in the class so there's no problem here accessing
a b or c regardless of their access modifier.
So this will be just fine.
Something else I wanted to note was that if we have a friend of this base class write a friend function
or a friend class that will have access to public protected and private information in this class.
OK so let's look at this first at the object level before we even get into inheritance.
Here we have a base class why don't we create a base object and it's right here on 931 I'm creating
an object called base and its class is based right up here.
We've got those three integers a b and c..
Now that's access them all.
So let's say base a is 100 they stop B is 200 and base C is 300.
Now what do we expect.
Well we've been through this before with public and private.
The only difference here is protected.
We expect based on a to be OK right.
It's public in base.
So the objects have access to it and we expect based C to give us a compiler error.
Right because it's private.
We don't have access to private data from our objects.
This is nothing new.
This is what we've learned all along.
Now there is no inheritance in here right because we're only dealing with that base class right now.
There is no derived class yet here.
So in this case I also expect a compiler error because as far as the compiler is concerned the protected
and private access modifiers really are the same when it comes to objects.
So this object base has no business messing with B or C because they're protected and the other one
is private.
So if I compile this I try to build and run this.
I should get to compiler errors and you can see him right there on the red arrows right here.
One says B is protected and the other one should say C is private OK so that makes sense right.
That's working with objects.
So let me comment these two lines and we'll move on now.
OK so now let's talk about inheritance.
Right here we're create we've got our base class just as before.
Now I'm creating a derived class I'm deriving this class publicly from base.
I'm inheriting everything in base and I'm using those rules that we saw with public inheritance.
So a is public in my parent so it's public in me.
B is protected in my parent so it's protected in me.
C is private in my parent so I inherit it.
But it is not accessible.
OK so it's important to understand that C is indeed inherited and will look at that when we walk through
the debugger when we step through it.
You just don't have access to it from within derived.
It makes sense that it's part of you since it is part of your parent.
OK so now what do we have access to here.
What we should have access to and be right within our derived.
We should not have access to see.
So why don't we write a real simple method here.
We'll just call it void access base members let's say and this won't do anything with just access those
things and see when we get compiler errors.
So we're going to say A equals 100 let's say right here.
Now can we expect this to be OK because a is public and my parent it's public in me.
We also expect to be equals 200 to be OK because it's protected and my parent it's protected in me.
This is a member function.
It's got access to it.
This is the problem here.
If I say C is 300 C is not accessible.
So we expect a compiler error here.
Again remember C is there if you need to access C or modify C..
You can't do it directly from derived you'll have to go through some Geter function or set or function
provided in the base class.
But we'll talk about that later.
So let's compile this now and we expect to get a compiler error right there on line 28 and that's exactly
what happens.
Right.
C is not accessible.
So you can see how these rules apply.
Now I'll comment that out and we'll do one last thing is we'll come down here now.
And remember what we did was we created base object and tried to access those three data members.
Then we created a derived class and saw what the access was here.
Now we're going to do it from a derived object so let's do that let's say derived let's just call it
D and we'll do the same thing.
We'll say a is 100 D.
B is 200 and D C is 300.
OK so take a look at a.
I'm accessing the a data member in the derived class.
Well let's move up here just a little bit.
A is going to be public.
So I should expect that to work.
But look in B and C protected and not accessible.
I don't have access to protect the data and I certainly don't have access to something that's not accessible.
So we expect this line to be OK and we expect both of these to give us compiler errors right here.
All right so let's give this a build and run.
And there you see everything else is clean all scroll up just a little bit.
And there you can see the compiler errors and it says just like you would expect this is protected in
this context.
And this guy is sorry I forgot a semi-colon.
Let me do that one more time.
Make sure we get the right compiler errors.
There we go.
So we still got the same two compiler errors but there are different errors now.
So in this case B is protected so we don't have access to it.
And down here C is private.
So we certainly don't have access to it.
OK.
All right so that's really what I wanted to show you in this video.
You can see that this makes sense.
All these protected data members will be inherited inherit inherited all the way down the hierarchy.
So you've got access to them through out.
OK so the last thing I want to do is I want to put a break point right here on line 42 network.
We're creating that derived object D.
And I want to debug this and step through maybe just so we can see what data looks like.
Ok so I'm right there line 42.
I'm going to step and I've just created that object and let's refresh this over here and first let's
look at base our base object which you can see right here.
9:36 has an AB and a C in it.
That's exactly what we expect.
B and C are 0 and A's 100.
Because I set that to 100 on line 37 it's you can see right here.
But now what about the derived object.
What would you expect that to look like internally.
Well it is a base right because we're using public inheritance you expect a b and c to be in there and
that's exactly what you have there is your base part.
And there's a b and c so the derived object D has a base object within it.
It seems obvious right.
But a lot of students get this confused because of that one rule that says private elements are not
accessible.
Somehow they sometimes think that not accessible means you didn't inherit it.
And that's not the case you can see it's really here right.
You can see that that C is there.
It has to be there since you are one of your parents.
So we're not deleting stuff we're not disinheriting stuff so we're getting everything from our parent.
So just because we don't have access to it doesn't mean it's not there I want it to be really clear
on that because I see students misunderstanding that a lot.
All right.
So in the next video we'll talk about constructors and destructors and the order that stuff happens
in with inheritance.